---
layout: post
title: "APIDays - Day 1"
tags: apidays
---

I got an invite to the API Days in Paris, so I went to see what the event was
about. I lasted two days but in only went there for one day, and not even a full
one. I just finished the dotCSS/dotJS events a few days before and my mind and
body needed some sleep.

API Days are a global conferences held in Paris, Barcelona and New Zealand.

I saw the opening keynote by my former co-worker Christian FaurÃ©. He did a nice
Octo branding with his laptop covered with a huge "There is a better way" (Octo
catchphrase).

The talk itself was not at al technical but was firtling with the philosophical.
How automation was always about confronting humans and robots, making robots
better than humans at what humans are doing. He gave the example of Deep Blue
competing (and winning) against Kasparov. That this automation is scary, because
it will kill jobs that were previously done by humans. This trend is confirmed
by all the conferences where you hear that _software is eating the world_.

He wanted to suggest another view, that was not based on conflict, but on
composition. That when you are young you learn how to move, to read, to write,
to calculate. At first it's hard, then you know it by heart, it's an automatism,
you don't even think about it, you can just do it without thinking. It's a form
of automation. You do things, without having to put all your mind to it.

At first you learn, then you automate. He then went on other considerations
about how culture beats strategy, and why we should not oppose creativity and
automation, but I don't really remember what he was exactly saying.

I then went to a few other conferences, but mostly stayed around the various
booths, discussing with people. In no specific order, here is what I remember:

APIs are a way of create wealth and distribute it in the digital economy. People
that are using API are both consumers and creators. The consume the API, but
they build things with it, so they are also creators in that regard.

The final user that will use the end product is the one that will get the most
value out of the API. But the developers that built something using the API are
the one who will get the more wealth out of it.

We should empower user to build more things using APIs. Exposing your data or
service is the first step but is no enough. You have to make sure people are
building things with it, and that other peoples are actually using those things.
Let's connect more API together, using services like IFTTT or Zapier. Let's make
tools that even non-technical people can use, and use to build new tools. It
should not require to be an engineer to use an API.

People were talking about API security, and how unit testing was the first step
to better security. That we should expose our APIs to the external world, but we
should also use APIs internally. A girl from context.io did a great talk
explaining how to break/test your API. Apiary explicitly said that most of the
company are building their API as an afterthougt.

The also emphasis the importance of great documentation. Giving Stripe as an
example. Travis and Digital Ocean were also named. Gelato is generating its own
doc from Swagger or Blueprint.

Having an API is not enough. you have to make it known to the world. Maybe give
away some stickers, but not too big. If you do T-shirt, also think of the female
version. Give vouchers, organize hackathons (with the devs that build the API).
And be present on Slack, Twitter, Email or maybe Gitter.

An API is a communication layer. Your organisation must have great
communication.

I'll finish on a funny note of something I overheard:

> I'm hacking logs with Haxe.

Which sometimes make me wonder if I really was attending a tech conference and
not a lumberjack one.
