---
layout: post
title: "dotCSS 2015"
tags: dotCSS
---

For the second year, I went to dotCSS. It took place at the same place as last
year, Théatre des variétés. As usual, we know only who will be speaking, but
have no idea what they are going to talk about. 

I met a few former colleagues (most of them had switched job in the past year),
so it was a nice way to catch up on the news.

partners platform.sh & myfonts. platform has a booth

## Rachel Andrew
autho
perch

better? grid or flexbox
shre feature, seârate dsplau frm source, alignement much better horieontal and
vertcal, responsive by default
(much ike mathieu talk)
each item know its part of a layout. while float has no idea that is part of
a layout
faux-coulmn with tiled background reak in RWD
then display table
examples flexbox/grid sidebar + content split in tow

back in the days, separatio of concerne markup/display was main rally cry
this failde => bootstrap, made the things easier for anybod
flexbox can change the order in css, not in the markup source order

grid-auto-flow permet de remettre automatiquement les éléments pour qu'ils
iennent dans le layout. CSS Grid est layout-aware
good because source order does not matter, accesisble source, and different
display
bad becaise we could stop caring about the source and do nasty things will
happen, like put everything in the same parent ina  WYSIWYG

vertical align
Then, it became really specific to the new syntax and I realized I might have
already seen this presentation at ParisWeb
gridbyexample.com

flexbox can change the order in css, not in the markup source order

grid-auto-flow permet de remettre automatiquement les éléments pour qu'ils
iennent dans le layout. CSS Grid est layout-aware
good because source order does not matter, accesisble source, and different
display
bad becaise we could stop caring about the source and do nasty things will
happen, like put everything in the same parent ina  WYSIWYG

vertical align
still not suported by default
advice. do not learn flexbox, wait for CSS grid
first time this property has been design with layout in mind
removes a lot of things in markup

## Andrey Sitnik
creator of postCSS
not sass or less, not another language, pipe of ransformation
parser that understand CSS to a tree, and strigifier that outut a sring
by default does nothin, but add plugins to transform things as it goes around

can add nesting like sass, or autoprefixer

issue is, we do sass too much, and we want to do sass again in postcss
postcss is not only for syntax suger, but for maintainable tasks

hardware, software, react will split big problems into small ones
but css is global, no modularization
global selectors, global reset, inherited properties

split design in components (log, button, header), a folder for eahc. css, js,
images for each
`@use` plugin will load a plugin locally to the file. this helps keep
dependencies for each component

plugins for bem. but bem is boring to do
css modules lets you write anything, and will do the BEM rest
adds random names into the classes
works well with React

postcss prefix to reset eahc item indiviually, no more * { reset }
inherited properties, problem
we get properties from third party top
but with postcss, cssnext will set initial data to anything, in all browsers

media queries, width is page-width, not component width
js polyfill to check parent properties to adapt child content (like change the
child color if backhrund parent is whote/blaclk)

absolute isolation of CSS. I should really try that, seems awesome
also seems a bit more complex
pas un ennemi de scss. existe postcs-precss pour refaire le sugar de scss, mais
plein d'autres bonnes choses pour l'isolation
@evilmartians, @andreysitnik
github.com/postcss/postcss
webpack uses postcss to transform the css

## Daniel Eden
Designer at Dropbox

cSS at dropbox
scaling css at dropbox
css at dropbox sucks
move slow and fix things

1220 scss files (Etsy 2000)
150.000 LOC 6% of the codebase (Etsy 200.000)
(what is this tool for the stats?)

a lot of peaople are touching scss, reset all, start from scratch, no
abstraction, specifificty and cascade issues
very good developpers and js and python, and do not understand css and write
a lot of it

primitive way to check: change, alt-tab, reload
everything can be overriden
box model counter intuitive
best practice are young
easy to write css to fix css to fix css to fix css
css is too easy to write

family guy gif CSS

so is scalling OOCSS, BEM, ITCSS, whatever? change will impact pages you dont
even know exists
(Etsy managed to crash the servers with a CSS change: relative loading of a css
that was indeed loadong an html 404, loading another 4040 and infinite loop)

solution
quantify. `cloc` for LOC
Parker + CSSStats

Add rules to the PR, so if edit this or this file, add him and him as reviewer
give CSS knowledge to users
CI Testing (houndci.com)
linters
Style guide (Dropbox one available)
lost 80% of their LOC by using postcss instead of mixins

nice, and humble. what worked for them
one gy took the lead because important
data, explain, teach, add tooling

working on visual regression testing














higlight
- postcss
- tool for css stats, CSSStats
- CSS Grod next year




