---
layout: post
title: "dotJS 2015"
tags: dotJS
---

After dotCSS last Friday, I started my week with dotJS on Monday. Same
organizers, but different Theatre. A bigger one was needed because dotJS it's
one full day of conferences for more than 1.000 attendees.

Overall, I liked dotCSS better (more compact, more human-sized, more great
talks), but there have been some nice things said here as well, so I'll try to
write all this here.

## Christophe Porteneuve

To wake us all up, we started with Christophe Porteneuve, his non-French accent
but very-English expressions, fast flow and way too bright slides.

At first I was a bit worried the talk was going to be something we had seen so
many times. Speaking about callback hell and why it was bad. Then introducing
promises and why it was good. 

Then he moved the further into unknown territory, using promises with
generators. He started by introducing the `yield` concept, all the way to the
`await` ES7 keyword. He said it himself that using promises with generators are
a bit hackish and not the way they are meant to be used, but that was an
interesting way to mix the concepts.

Slides are [available here][1].

_And Christophe does the same jokes in English than in French :)_

> By reading the docs, you're instantly part of the 1% best developers in the
> world.

## Mathias Buus

Second talk was by Mathias Buus. There was a slide issues that forced him to
redo the start of his talk, then there might have been a mic issue because it
was hard to hear what Mathias was saying. Or maybe he was just not speaking
loudly enough.

It took me a while to understand what the topic of the talk was about. I managed
to understand it was a project named hyperdrive, but it was only when he
explained that it is a bittorent-like exchange format, done in JavaScript, that
he got me hooked.

Hyperdrive uses something called _smart diffing_ to split each file into chunks
of data. It then does a checksum on each chunk, an store all the checksums into
a table, a bit like a dictionnary. In the end, to download a complete set of
files, you only need to download each chunk listed in the dictionnary and
combine them to recreate the files. Doing so, you will never download twice the
same content.

There is also another optimisation of creating a recursive hash on top of each
set of hashed, in some kind of tree structure, but I will not be able to explain
it here.

He ended his talk with a demo of it in action, actually streaming a 200MB video
file from one browser to another, just by sharing a hash representation of the
tree of hashes.

The talk was a bit slow to start, but the end result was impressive, and I liked
him taking the time to explain and demystify the bittorent logic (even if I did
not remember everything).

## Samuel Saccone

Third talk was by Samuel Saccone, that wasn't speaking really loudly either.
Samuel told us about how you're supposed to debug a JavaScript application that
becomes slow or unresponsive if used for a long period.

Such issues usually come from memory leaks. But as he so perfectly pointed out
in its talk, it is not enough to know that. One actually have to be able to
pinpoint the issue and fix it.

If you search for this issue on Google, you'll surely find some nice articles by
Paul Irish or Addy Osmani and maybe even a Chrome dev tool video. Things looks
so nice and easy when other are explaining it, but when it's your turn to
actually understand the complex Chrome UI and untangle your messy code, this is
a whole new story.

I was glad that I wasn't the only one struggling to understand how to fix that
(and after discussing with other people, the feeling was shared). Fixing memory
leaks is not something we want to do. This should be the browser or framework
job. But as Samuel pointed, framework developers are humans as well, and they
either might not get it.

Usually, when you have a memory leak, it is because the garbage collector cannot
get rid of some elements and keep them in memory. It cannot delete them because
they still have a reference to an object that still exists. Most common examples
are listeners to `document` or keeping a handy reference to `_app` in our views
for examples (I plead guilty to this, back in my Backbone days).

He then walk use through the process of finding and fixing the bug, with a nice
touch of humor. But the really nice information is that we can now write
non-regression tests that checks for memory leaks.

By using drool, we can have access to the current node count in the browser
memory, so it's just a matter of running a set of actions repeatedly and see if
that number grows or not.

I do not often have to debug memory leaks, but when I do, I always have to
re-watch the same video tutorials and try to make it work with my current app.
At least now I know that I'm not the only one finding this hard, and I'll even
be able to write tests to prevent this from occuring again.

## Rebecca Murphey

The last talk of the first session was by Rebecca Murphey, who had the difficult
task of speaking between us and the lunch. Four sessions in the morning might be
a bit too much, maybe 3 would have been better.

Anyway, she spoke a bit about HTTP/2, and what it will change. She, too, had
some mic issues and I had a hard time following what she was saying. I was a bit
afraid she was going to do a list of what HTTP/2 was changing (something I had
already seen several times recently -at ParisWeb and the perfUG for example-).
But, no, instead she focused on asking more down-to-earth and sensible
questions.

First is: how will the server push data to the client. HTTP/2 lets the server
pro-actively push data to the client. For example, if the client asks for an
HTML page, the server can reply with a CSS, JavaScript and/or images along with
the HTML, speculating that the user will ask for them later anyway.

All the needed syntax is available in the protocol to allow that, but how will
server know what to send? Will it be some kind of heuristic guessing based on
previous requests? Will it be some configuration in our nginx files, or a LUA
module that can process a bit of logic? Nothing is yet implemented to do it in
any webserver.

There are a few POC webservers that lets you do it, but they exist only so we
can test the various syntax and see which one is best. Nothing is ready yet,
this is a new story we'll have to write.

Second question was: how are we, web developers, going to debug HTTP/2 requests?
The current Chrome and Firefox dev tools do not display the server push in the
waterfall. Also, HTTP/2 being wrapped a binary protocol, all previous HTTP tool
will need an upgrade to work with HTTP/2.

Also, how are we going to transition from HTTP to HTTP/2? Most of the webperf
best practices in HTTP are either useless or bad practice in HTTP/2. Are we
going to have two builds, and redirect to one or the other based on the user
support of HTTP?

If we look at how big CDN names are currently handling HTTP/2, we see that they
are not ready either. At the moment, only Cloudflare implements it, but it does
not (yet) provided a way to do server push.

At first, the low voice volume, hungry belly and generic explanation of HTTP/2
make me fear a boring talk. In the end, the question asked were clever and made
me think. We wanted HTTP/2. Now we have it. But we still have to build stuff
with it and the next few years will be spend toying with it, discovering usages,
building stuff and emerging best practices. Can't wait to get started.

You can find [the slides here][2]

## Lunch break and lightning talks

As usual, the food was excellent, and the mountain of cheese is always a nice
touch. As usual, the main hall is also too crowded. Everybody is crammed between
the food tables and the sponsors booths.

After eating, but before starting with the real speakers, we had the lightning
talks. There was much more of them than in dotCSS, which is nice.

Johannes Final showed us swagger-codegen which is a tool to generate a SDK for
any API that is exposed through Swagger.

Vincent, my colleague, shared with us [the best way to publish ES6 modules
today][3].  Any module should be loadable either from a `require` or a script,
and be easily pushed to `npm`. The browser support is too low to directly push
stuff in ES6, and the various dev environment is too fragmented to safely push
a `browserify` or `webpack` enabled module.

The trick is to push to `npm` and the CDNs an ES5-compatible version, the one
that is built by Babel for example, while still maintaining an ES6 codebase for
developers.

After than, [Etienne Margraff][4], did a demo of
Vorlon.js, a local webserver to debug any application, on any device by
redirecting all debug messages to the webserver UI.

Then Maxime Salnikov tried to explain how Angular 2 was working. I say try
because I did not get it. Maybe it comes from my aversion to Angular and the
strong Russian accent.

Finally, Nicolas Grenié did a commercial presentation of Amazon Lambdas. This
was not supposed to be commercial I guess, just a way to explain how serverless
microservices are working and why it's a good thing, but in reality as it was
only talking about Amazon lambda this feeled weird. Oh and the _serverless_ part
only means that the server is on somebody else infrastructure. Nevertheless,
I was convinced by the power of the approach and would like to tinker with it.

## Nicolas Bevaqua

After that, we got back to the main speakers. And this is also when it started
to get really hot in the theater. This only got worse the more we advanced into
the evening, but man it was hot. And while I'm complaining I might add that the
available space to put my leg was too small, even on the first floor and
I didn't have much space to put my elbows either which made it quite hard (and
sometime painful) to take notes.

Anyway, back to real business. Nicolas might better be known under the ponyfoo
alias. You might know him for his extensive and very useful serie of blog posts
about ES6.

Actually if that's how you know him, you pretty much aready know everything he
was saying in his talk. Basically he went over all the goodness that makes
writing ES6 code so much enjoyable than ES5: arrow functions,
spread/destructuring, default function values, rest parameters, sring
interpolation, `let`, `const` and other shiny new stuff.

I won't detail it here, but I strongly invite you to read on the subject, `npm
install --save-dev babeljs` and start using it right away.

## Andre Medeiros

The next one totally deserves the award of best talk of the day. Andre had some
really simple, clear and beautiful slides, he told us a nice programming story
in small increments and managed to convey complex concepts to the audience.

I was hooked really quickly and it's only at the end of the talk that he told us
that he just teached us what reactive programming is, how it works, what problem
it solves. Thanks a lot for that, this is the talk I enjoyed the most, and one
I will remember for a long time. I even stopped taking notes at the end to keep
focused on the talk.

He walked us through the story of two linked variables, and how changing one
would affect the other, and the window of inconsistency this could create. It
then changed our point of view and represented those changes on a timeline where
we do not need to know the value of each var at any given time, but only the
event that lead to some changes in the value. He compared it to the difference
between our age and our birthday. We do not need to know how old we are for any
second of our live. We just need to know our birthday.

I tried to put into words what I learned from his talk, but this wouldn't do it
justice. Instead, I encourage you to wait for the video of his talk, book 18
minutes in your busy schedule and watch it. It's worth it.

All of the concepts he talked about, and much much more, are implemented in
RxJS. 

Did I told you how great that talk was?


## Eric Shoftall

After another break, we continued with Eric Shoftall. The theater was getting
hotter and hotter and it was getting really uncomfortable and harder to
concentrate.

Still, Eric talk was interesting so it made it easier. Eric is a fun guy (who
ran for mayor of SF and did lobbying using mechanical turks), created gulp, and
now tries to make WebRTC work everywhere.

WebRTC is still a cutting-edge technology. It is only really well supported by
Chrome, and is hard to implement. There are a large number of quirks to know.
The basic dance to get two nodes to connect is a bit long (but can be abstract
in a few lines through the Peer module).

But where things are really getting complicated, it's when you need to make it
work in Android, iOS and IE. But you need to, because as Eric said:

> If you build an app that works only in Chrome, it's not an app, it's a demo.

Recent Android phone ships with Chrome, so it works well. But old version have
a crappy browser installed by default. Fortunatly, if you package your app in
a Cordova bundle, using Crosswalk, you can force the webview to use the latest
Chrome.

For iOS, we enter the hackish zone. There is something calle iosrtc, which is
a WebRTC polyfill written in Swift. It re-implement the methods and protocol in
another thread, which makes it integrate with the webview quite challenging. For
example, to play a video using it, you have to manually display the video from
the other thread with an absolute positionning on top of the webview. 

This soooooo reminds me of the old hacks to do file uploads in HTML by
overlaying a transparent SWF file above a `file` upload to allow uploading
several files at once. This was so hacky, on so many levels...

For IE, there is a proprietary IE plugin called Temasys that users need to
manually install before being able to use WebRTC. And even once installed, you
have to deal with the same positioning hacks than for iOS.

In the end, Eric created [WebRTC everywhere][5], that packs all the solutions to
the common issues he found into one neat bundle. I liked this talk because it is
always interesting to see the creative ways we find to fix complex issues.

## Forbes Lindesay

On the next talk, Forbes, creator of the Jade HTML preprocessor walked through
the various parts that compose a transpiler (compiler? post-processor? I don't
know).

We're used to using this kind of tools today. CoffeeScript, Babel, SCSS, postCSS
and Jade (that actually had to be renamed to Pug because of legal issues...).

All of this tools (as we've already seen in the postCSS talk at dotCSS) are made
up of three parts. First a Lexer to parse the string code into a list of tokens.
Then a Parser that convert those tokens into a structured tree. And finally
a code generator that will output it back as a string.

I already had a general idea of lexers and parsers were working, and I guess
people that did a computer school had to build one at some point. But it was
nice to not assume that everybody knows everything, and re-explain this kind of
stuff.

It might have been a bit too long sometimes, and could have been made shorter
because some parts really seemed obvious. Anyway, as he said at the end of the
talk, now the audience knows how this works and can contribute to Pug :)

Actually, Pug seems to be to HTML what postCSS is to CSS. You can build your own
plugin to add to the Pug toolchain and maybe define you own HTML custom tags or
attributes to transpile (compile? post-process? damn.) them into something else.

I still do not know how to build my own lexer/parser after this talk, but
I liked the idea of making Pug modular and more high level. This also does
a great echo to all the good things that have been said on postCSS.

## Tim Caswell

Tim (aka @creationix) and his son Jack then did a live-coding session involving
colored LEDs, an arduino and, maybe, JavaScript. By that time, I had moved to
the ground level where the air was fresher.

I must say that I did not get what the message of this talk was. Tim explained
that there are no programmers in his town, and he wanted to make coding easy and
teach him around him, especially to kids. This is all well and a very nice
idea... but then I failed to really understand the rest of the talk :/

Tim's son, Jack, managed to live-code something in a weird programming language
to make some leds to blink and a robot to move. The language itself looked so
low level to me, that the performance seemed more to be how the kid managed to
remember all the magic numbers to use. Really, having to input stuff like
`istart 0x70` or `write 6` is absolutly not the idea of programming I would like
to show to people that don't know anything about it.

## Henrik Joreteg

So, after this small WTF talk, we're back to one of the best talks of the day,
done by Henrik Joreteg.

He started his talk with something that makes a lot of sense. When you use
a mobile phone, you're actually using a physical object, and when you use its
touch screen you want it to react immediatly. That's how we're used to have
physical objects to react; immediatly.

But the web of yesterday has been thought for the desktop, with desktop hardware
and speed. The web of today is, in the best of cases, mobile-first. Still, this
is not enough because the web of tomorrow will be mobile-only. There are more
and more users everyday that uses smartphones only and have ditched their
desktop browser.

Still, we, the web developer community, build our websites on a desktop machine.
And we primarily test it on the desktop as well, only testing on mobile
emulators later in the cycle and on real devices really at the end of the chain
while we should actually do the opposite. We should all have a physical phone
near to our work station and take it in our hand when we code for it. This will
make us really feel what we are coding for.

He also quoted a tweet saying:

> If you want to write fast code, use a slow computer

Which is absolutly true. I think we're guilty of thinking along the lines of
"_oh yes it is a bit slow on mobile, but mobiles are getting more powerful every
6 months so this should be ok soon_". But that's not true. Not everybody has the
latest iPhone, nor a fast bandwidth, but they still want a nice experience.

Google fixed some rules to their products, based on the number 6. I did not
manage to write them all down, but it was something like:

- max 60KB of HTML
- max 60KB of CSS
- max 60KB of JavaScript
- 60fps
- max .6s to load the page

They managed to achieve it, and I think they are sensible values that we could
all try to reach. Forcing us to work under a budget will help us make things
better. It might be hard, but not impossible.

He then continued by giving some advices on what we should do, and most of all
what we should stop doing.

First of all, we should get back to the server-side rendering that we should
never have stopped doing. Browser are really fast at parsing HTML, much more
than they are at parsing and executing js then building the DOM. There is no
need to go all isomorphic/universal/whatever the latest trend. Just push the
HTML you now is going to be needed to the page. There's even a webpack config
that can do that for you.

Second point is to really think if you need the whole framework you're using or
if you need a framework at all. Do we need a templating system when we have JSX?
No need to parse and modify DOM element when we have HTML-to-Javascript
transforms at build time.

Also, React proved that re-rendering the whole UI whenever the app state changed
could actually be really lightweight as long as you use a virtual DOM. If you
strip everything down, in the end, your whole app can be simplified as `newVDom
= app(state)`. You have only one state for your whole app, you process it, and
it returns a virtual DOM. If you really need a little more structure on how the
data flows, you can add Redux which is only 2KB.

React is nice, but the real gold nugget in it is the virtual dom. You can
extract only this part from the React core for only 10% of the total size.

The last trick is to use the main browser thread for the UI rendering (vdom to
DOM) and make all the heavier computation asynchronously in WebWorkers on the
side. The UI only pass actions to the WebWorkers that yield the new vdom back to
the UI thread when they are done.

You can see this in action on a website named pokedex.com, which apparently
works also really well on old mobile devices.

I liked that talk as well, because he did not hesitate to challenge what we take
as granted. It's healthy once in a while to cleanup what we think we now about
our tool, remove the dusts and change some of our tools. React introduced some
really clever ideas, and even if the framework as a whole works nice, you can
still cherry-pick parts of it to go with the bare minimum.

## Brendan Eich

TODO:
pas cmpris de quoi ça parlait, et WTF de lui qui joue à des jeus on stage
il a fallu qu'on m'explique le TC39 et ce qu'était asm.js pour que je comprenne
webassembly ensuite
j'avais beosin d'un previously on brendan eich pour capter

WebEvolution of standards

what happendd in the last 2 years
FirefoxOS failed, as well as Tizen
ore and more smartphones
Flipkart killed their mobile website
But came back with rprogressie web app

people want apps. new os cannot wokrk withou app. app make will only develop for
known os. nothin happens

EWM?

still, the web is getting bettre, will not go away, even if there are walled
arded,. we hae mostly no issue of compatibility, xecpt every decade

the web is not minimalist, we cannot build a nw part that does not work with the
previous ones.

Today
Google is the new Microsoft
Microsoft is Mozilla
Apple is Apple


lost it. did not get what he was talking about at the end
live playing? wtf talk
I couldn't follow but wen I tried to catch up, he was playing a facebook game on
a crashong nighly firefox
chicken with guns, killing pigs

main advice
js can do full apps, ca be fast, can be fixed, can use multicore/GPU, can do
everthing people were saying it could not do






General disareement, to make it better next time

to hot, bad mic in the morning
could not really hear what Sylvain was asking
my eyes are getting worse
small place for legs, small place for elbows for writing
small language Sylvain "you know"

> Stupid idea: dotCSS logo in one div
.dotcss {
  background-color: $grey;
  background-image: // for loop of rows of radial-gradients
  &:before {
    content: "dot\ACSS"
    // Is actually the "css" part
  }
  &:first-line {
    background: yellow;
    text-align: center;
    border-radius: 50%
  }
  &:after {
    content: "The largest CSS conference in europe"
    color: $white;
    position: absolute;
    bottom: 0;
    right:0
    left:0;
  }
}


[1]: http://bit.ly/dotjs-async
[2]: http://bit.ly/http2-make-it-easy
[3]: http://slides.com/vvo/authoring-and-publishing-es6-modules-today-dotjs-2015#/
[4]: https://twitter.com/meulta/
[5]: http://rtc.works/
