---
layout: post
title: "CSS Paris #3"
tags: css
---

Third edition of the ParisCSS meetup. I could not attend to the first two
session, so this is a first for me. It took place at Numa, and we were about 70.

# CSS Masks

In the first talk, [Vincent De Oliveira][1] told us about CSS masks. He started
by telling us that we might all already use CSS masks without knowing it.

`border-radius` and `overflow:hidden` are already rules that involves masks,
even if we do not really think of them that way. He showed some really nice and
clever tricks with a few simple divs, rotation animation and `overflow:hidden`.

He then told us about clipping, or how to use images with some transparent
pixels to define which part of an image should be displayed. He had an
impressive demo of a text that could be visible trough a complex form (here it
was the Eiffel tower), only using an image as background and a mask on top of
the element.

The end of the talk was really impressive, but it was also really hard to
understand how things were working. He showed us how he animated icons or
animated a cursive script but to be honest I did not really understood how this
worked. I'll have to play with [the slides][2].

# Rendering performances

The second talk was done by Jean-Pierre Vincent (alias @theystolemynick). I gave
him an Algolia shirt #millisecondsmatters right before the talk, and he wore it
while speaking.

The slides are already available [here][3].

The talk was dense, and a broad array of topics were discussed, but the overall
rhythm was slow and it was sometimes hard to follow. The talk started with the
conventionnal numbers for this kind of talk (speed is directly linked to
revenue), but he also spoke about how it is now good for SEO and how the human
brain reacts to instant.

He covered the subjects of repaints and reflows in CSS, but focused on CSS
animations compared to jQuery animations. Done well, animations can really
improve the user speed perception. Quickly moving items or fading images when
changing pages can distract the user long enough so she cannot see that a page
is currently loading.

His point was that jQuery animations are not inherently slow because they use
JavaScript, but because this JavaScript asks position and dimension information
to the DOM engine. First, to get the correct values, the DOM engine must force
a reflow of the whole page. Also, it requires a communication bridge between the
JavaScript thread and the DOM engine, which requires stopping both of them while
they communicate.

For every animation that do not depend on user input (eg. moving an image from
one fixed position to another), we can pre-compute the bounds and simply create
two CSS classes (one for the start and one for the end), and use CSS animations
to let the GPU handle the rendering.

For "unpredictable animations" (eg. based on the way the user moves her mouse or
scroll the page), there is not silver bullet. The main advice is to throttle or
debounce the call. There is no need to fire an animation on every `scroll` event
for example, but only on the first or last one.

As always, there is no perfect solution. One must be aware of all the pros and
cons of every technique. For example, using the GPU (through CSS animations)
allows for much faster rendering, but will also drain the battery more quickly
on mobile devices. One can use the `translateZ(0)` trick to force an animation
to use the GPU, but this will prevent browsers from doing any optimisation.

The trickiest part is that some devices have better GPU than others. Sometimes,
it is better to let the CPU handle the animation in specific browser/device
targets. As it is near impossible to perfectly target each mobile/browser with
the best implementation, you either have to go for the lowest common
denominator, or only focus on a few specific devices. None of this solutions are
optimal.

# CSS Grids

The last talk was done by my fellow co-organizer of the HumanTalks Paris,
Mathieu Parisot.

He gave a rapid overview of the various layout techniques in CSS. We started
with `<table>`-based layout, using the HTML markup to split our page. Then, we
started using `float` and `display: table`, which are still hacks and not made
to do layout. Then came `display: inline-block` which have all the pros of
`inline` (stays on the same line) and `block` (can have dimensions), but still
has its own shortcomings (whitespace in markup and parent `font-size` can impact
the rendering).

In the end, doing layouts in CSS is not easy and requires a deep knowledge of
all the quirks and limitations. Frameworks like Bootstrap exists so users do not
see the complex code used to do a simple grid layout. Few people really know how
things work internally. 

Then came flexbox, that is a set of CSS properties here for layout purposes. You
can recreate all that Bootstrap offers in term of grid, in classical CSS.

Still, all this techniques requires you to have specific markup to mark your
rows from your columns. If you want to do a specific layout on various RWD
breakpoints, and move element from one row to another you might have to add the
element twice to the markup and show/hide them depending on the current
viewport.

`display: grid` is the future of CSS and fixes all that. By adding this to
a parent element and then adding `grid-row` and `grid-column` attributes to
children elements, we can simply specify where each cell should go. It also
comes with its own set of rules letting you define a custom grid template,
default spacing, stacking cells, move cells on breakpoints, define their
dimensions based on the available space and even do ASCII art to draw your grid.

This is brilliant and really really powerful while having a simple and
straightforward syntax. Unfortunatly, this is only available in the latest
Chrome under an experimental flag. 

Anyway, this future CSS syntax will one day become our present CSS syntax, so
we'd better start using it now to get familiar with it and push issues and
feature requests.

## Conclusion

The overall level of the talks is quite high for a young meetup like this one,
and the large number of attendees shows that Paris needed a CSS meetup. I will
speak at the next event and encourage you to submit your talk ideas or
proposals.

[1]: https://twitter.com/iamvdo
[2]: http://slides.iamvdo.me/parisweb14/#/
[3]: http://fr.slideshare.net/jpvincent/les-performance-de-rendu-sur-mobile
