---
layout: post
title: "TakeOffConf 2016"
tags: takeoffconf
---

# The Web and the Butterfly effect
Small things can cause great chaos
Tag soup and no standards force people to find ways around
Accessibility, compatibility, portability
We don't know who is going to access our applications
Not everyone has the latest retina mac and fiber
Bad HTML means bad CSS, bad accessibility, etc
But good HTML is not enough. Use the elements for their semantics for SEO, a11y,
do not use divs with inline classes everywhere
Example of Facebook HTML code, lots of divs, not all accessibility
Shown that not great HTML structure

# Machine Learning
Transform data into chatbot scenarios
Decision tree. If this and this and that, then this outcome
Machine learning demo with Jupyter on data from teh survival from the Titanic
Can train algorithm with data form various caracs (number of rooms, price,
garden, surface) and can estimate the price from various caracs not in the input
data

# Lesson learned from Docker
Scalingo
REX on how to install docker in prod and run code that you don't own
1000s container started and stopped everyday
Build images, run containers in isolation, monitor it
From docker pre-releases to stability today
Docker 1.0 was not stable. Just created a company and event so release
a version, but big bugs of crashing the whole server
Docker engine are using latest linux kernel, so putting a lot of load to the
kernel developer now that Docker uses it much. Creates race conditions in kernel
that was not apparent before
5 different filesystemes, only use BTRFS at Scalingo because each other one have
bugs for the scaling of what they do (lots of containers, lots of files insides,
etc)

Monitoring by default lets you monitor 10 containers. How do you monitor 100s of
them? Docker uses 1CPU just to monitor metrics. scalingo/acadock-monitoring for
monitoring in high docker density

Docker major version every 3 month. Hard to upgrade, also need to handle the
stop/start of containers when upgrading

number of process inside docker are shared per user, not per container
same issue with filesystem size, how to apply quota and limits to each users.
also depends on the filesystem chosen

But good part is that lots of containers following a convention
Mesos, Kubernetes, CoreOS


# CleverCloud
IT automation
Nice slides of Hosting Power
make the brain of human more used by automating what can be done by computers
software is eating the world. we automate more and more
and the world is small, it's global, no more geography involved
we do not need an IT department, like using computer
there is no virtual world online and real world, there is only one world

bookkeeper point of view
investment today to get more later
so you can know how much a line of code is worth, and that you need to use it
for at least X years to get back your investment
everything follow that: V cycle. People managing are at the top

you don't see when servers are workin, you see when they are not
so it's seen as a cost
different teams, with different goals, not aligned

devops is way of working
same team, same budget

issue is internal framework: we invested a lot in that so we cannot change, and
so we keep investing in it (Meetic)
Technical debt. It's a debt. Either your reimburse it, or take another debt on
a debt

they build an internal tool for 10 months. errors, lots of tech. had a hard time
getting let it go. invested a lot of it in it.
but aftre a crash, rebuild something new. was much better once they knew what
they were doing. removed the cruft, did not do the same mistkes again
value is not in the code. It can be rewritten. value is in the people that wrote
it, that can rewrite it. Human brain is more important than written code

old code is just code with old bug. new code is just code with new bugs

there is no trsuted network, no firewall, no fortress behind which you can hide
security is not a protection, nor a reaction, it's a perpetual process

you can build crap quick, it's ok, but you should not invest on it
kill it, rebuild

you're not a beautiful and unique snowflake. you have the same problem as
everybody else

# Multi-tenancy

Nuxeo

# Algolia

Big search bar
Instant search as you type

# Twilio

# Digital Nomad
@wearecoders
@dmgarland

Digital Nomad worked in a lot of places
brit. Brexit, how to engage UK developers
Need personnal help to get to know the customs and surrounding for Brexit
developers
Language barrier. "Job dans ton queue"
Azerty / Qwerty => Ctrl-A / Ctrl-Q (select all, quit all)
CDI/CDD?
2h lunch break

digital nomad can take davantage of brexit
Wants remote working/home/day off. need time to go to the bank, settle in. need
flexible ours
need to show the french culture
help to learn a language
help with relocation. where are the cool places, invite for social occasion.
explain how things work, metro, neighborhoods, etc

We are coders
3 months of training in a mansion where the live, learn, pair program and are
paid to to real work

provide support
mentorin
pair programmin
training
good pay (no equity)
take background into consideration


# API Platform

Symfony core team member
Hard french accent, but ok
Les-tilleuls.coop. All shares owned by the employees, all benefits sared, all
decisions shared
Using React/Angular and Elastic?

People spend more time on their mobiles than on TV. Everything is connected
(house, car, watch, etc)

lots of things to think about whn doing API.
cache, CORS, etc
standard to use


# Native Script

Sebastian Witalec
Telerik
Angular code to do native
Nice for doing native apps, bad for the HTML/JS mess

# CouchDB

Sync between two apps without using a Cloud

# Hanami

ibakesoftware.com
@\_toch

Moder fwk for ruby for API
Light, only the gems you want, no magic
fast, force you to write explicit and clear intent. No method_missing and magic
stuff







Themes:
API, Bots, Machine Learning
Docker myths, about how to use them in production





