---
layout: post
title: "Paris.rb"
tags: parisrb
---

This event of Paris.rb was hosted by Drivy. It apparently was one of the first
time they hosted a meetup, but they did a very good job out of it. There room is
not very big, but they have an open terrace where we could chat before and after
the talks.

This Paris.rb meetup had an especially long schedule of talks. I rarely go
to a meetup with more than 4 and this one had 6, so brace yourself.

## Content Security Policy

This subject is something I see more and more often lately (there was
a conference about it at ParisWeb the year before and at dotSecurity this year).
This time the talk was done by Dorian Lupu from Kundigo.

It is actually part of a serie of talks, revolving around security that Dorian
is giving every month at Paris.rb. He is actually looking for others to speak on
the subject, and we discussed about maybe having Adam doing a talk about
HackerOne in an upcoming meetup.

Anyway, back to the topic of CSP. The goal of CSP is to define some security
rules that the visitor browser will obey, like refusing to load some assets if
they are not loaded from a trusted (whitelisted) source. This gives a good
protection about XSS, but does nothing against SQL injection for example.

A common practice is to only allow scripts loaded from the main host server.
Problem start to arise when you need to load elements from a CDN, as those can
host pretty much any content, filtering on the host is in no way enough to
protect you from malicious content. Disabling the execution of inline JavaScript
on the other end is a bit drastic, but is a nice way to prevent most of the XSS.

You can go even further if you want, and add `nonce` to the data-attributes of
the script tag, and the server must return the same nonce in its header for the
browser to actually execute the script. The same can be achieved by specifying
a sha hash on the script tag that should match the hash of the received content.
That way, any tampering of the received content would be intercepted.

On the backend side, it's easy to install as there is a twitter/secureheaders
gem for Rails that takes care of everything for you. If you want to fiddle with
it manually, you can have a look at securityheaders.io, and the
content-security-policy.com website for the complete reference.

I won't be surprised to see more and more talks about CSP in the coming years,
until it becomes a common practice, just like concatenated scripts. Even if I'm
not building any backend websites regularly at the moment, it is still a useful
feature to add to any static or front-end only website. XSS can come in many
forms.

## CSP in 30 seconds

Next talk was from a different speaker, but on the same subject. This time, it
was from the nice folks at Sqreenr. They explained how they see CSP as a net
thrown on top of your website. It has holes to only let through some specific
assets, and will block all others.

After a rapid poll, about 5% of the room were already using CSP (while it is
around 2% worldwide). It's still low, and they explained it because it is hard
to use (well, you have to read the doc...). A simple error in a configuration
rule could block assets that shouldn't be blocked and suddenly your whole
website is no longer usable. The good news is that the browser market of today
is overall compatible (and if not, they will just ignore the rules, so not worse
that what you had before).

Sqreenr built a tool to help you install CSP easily on your website. The way it
works you just have to enable the `report mode` of the CSP and target your
Sqreenr account. It will log all the requests and generate a default policy that
you can then enable. It also provides a clean UI to add/remove rules and
generating the matching policy.

Never used Sqreenr on one of my personal projects, but from what I've seen and
heard, it looks promising.

## Bugmastery

This one was from the host of the night, Drivy, explaining their way of handling
production bugs. All apps have bugs, and no matter how hard we try to eliminate
them before pushing to production, there will always be bugs in production. The
question is how do you deal with them.

At Drivy, they have and internal Slack channel with all the employees. When
a customer asks a question on live-chat or email and the persons on support do
not know the answer, they can ask their question on this internal slack and get
answer from others. This keeps a the support team as a first filter to all
generic questions, with a way to publicly (but still internally) escalate to
others of the team.

They also use a tool called BugSnag to log all the error 500 into a dashboard.
Then every week one of their developers go through the dashboard and look at all
the errors, and dispatch them. They can either ignore them (if it's an already
fixed error), file an issue (if a new bug), assign to someone (the owner of such
feature) or snooze it (it it's so weird that they have no idea what it could be,
but want to keep track of it if it ever come back again).

Finally, they keep graphs of the number of occurence of each error. This serves
a double purpose of first making sure that errors are decreasing in time, and
secondly rapidly catching spikes of errors that shows that something is wrong in
production. If something unusual is detected, people are woken up through
PagerDuty.

I particularly like the idea of having a Slack channel dedicated to support
question. At first I thought it was an open one, where customers could directly
go, but it turns out it was only used for internal purposes. Still, good idea.

## Zero Downtime deployment

We continued the series with tips on how to deploy without anyone noticing.
Being able to easily deploy new features or bug fixes without your customers
noticing is a real business advantage. Applications that have to close for a few
hours to upgrade their systems will disappear in the coming years, even if we
still see [some](http://www.ingdirect.fr/) [today](http://eu.battle.net/en/).

One way to do that is following a Blue/Green deployment phase. You basically
have two environments hidden behind a DNS router. All customer requests hitting
the DNS router will be redirected to the environment A, while you deploy the new
version of the app on environment B. Once your deployment is finished, you
reconfigure the DNS router so the domain name now redirect to the IP of
environment B.

The speaker also explained that the "unused" environment can even be used as
a staging environment before the deployment. The staging environment is no
longer a copy of the prod environment, it actually was and will be the prod
environment.

The other solution is to do a Rolling Deployment. You actually have a large
number of identical and stateless servers behind your load balancer. Each
request hitting the LB will be forwarded to one of the servers at random. When
you want to deploy a new version, you simply remove one server from the pool,
upgrade it to the new version, then add it again to the pool. 


Rolling deployment
plusieurs serveurs derrière un load balancer
un coupe un, remplace par un nouveau, ainsi de suite
Q: Donc à un moment le cluster possède un serveur dans un autre état que les
autres? Pas génant ?

I would personnally be reluctant to use the DNS router solution. DNS have
caching mechanisms on so many levels (on the customer computers, on their
routers and on the ISP), that it seems hard to know when all the customers will
actually be really migrated to the new version. DNS are supposed to have TTL
configuration, but there is no certainty that those TTL will be honored by every
actor along the line. Also, I'd rather have a real staging environment that
I can use 24/7 because in that scenario, the staging is unusable when there is
a deploy in progress.



## Failing at state machine

Movie, in_production, finish_shooting, in_theaters

## Comment commencer à blogguer
Philippe Bourgau
@pbourgau

5 ans de blog
blogguer apporte retweets, invité aux meetups, offres d'emploi à l'international
plein d'excuses "pas le temps", "rien à dire", "je sais pas écrire", "quelqu'un
l'a déjà dit"
fake it till you make it. commence et ça arrive
repenser à la dernière fois que cherché pendant lgtps
pas perso, donc tech va blesser personne
le temps ça se trouve

on apprends plus en expliquant qu'en faisant
pas compliqué
notebook personnel on retrouve plus tard

plateforme de blog
octopress, medium, posthaven, logdown
essayer de poster régulièrement (1/semaine)
facile de commencer avec des articles "how to..."
twitte, liens github, hackernews



