---
layout: post
title: "DevRelCon 2016"
tags:
---

## authenticity
humans can't scale, one on one relationship are human and don't scale
improve by listening more
we need to listen to our users and communities and out of community and speak
for them
bring back their message inside the compnay, give an external feedback outside
of the "everything is perfect" from inside

do less
need to spend more time with each person
job is stressful, more than 15 events, more and more to do
no need to go to other event. need space for itself

slow down

each company has  avalue statemet
each of us need one too, and follow thier values
stressful job. need to be at its best on stage. people talk to each other and
you might be invited again or blasklisted
putting personal image of itself on stage, bit of schizophenia between the
personal image and the company image
need some breaks, need to do more, but do it better

need to see the job as a service
who are our users? who is the audience? why spaking to them?

76% of dev advcates make more than 60k pounds


## AAARRRP

dev rel is like the force. we cannot see it, feel it, but we need to believe in
it

booths are for awereness, people know we exists

big customers but sales focus, so no-one in the dev field hierd of them
wanted to hire someone to do that
dev rel is doing product feedbck ondocmentation, dasjboard, DX

how to manage your managers
identify activities that will reach goals, activivites that can reach sveral
goals
see on Awereness, acquisition, atiation, rentetion, referral, revenu, product
tutorials, references, apas, hacks, thought leadreship, meetups, etc
see which ativities engage on what and focus on thise

docs are for ewareness, activation, retetion and product
hackathons is awernes, acquisition, activation and product

need to focus on max 3 of the AAARRRP letters

find complimentary activities. update lib, write blog post, twee, build demo,
talk to conference

evangelism is a one-way conversation
adovcacy is a two-way conversation

## Wing it

terms
advocacy / evengelism

outbound
technology awerness, education and recruitment
ortech feedback
two directions

the more people use the sofware riht, the less support we have to do
job description is not enough, we need to know the company
same set of skills good or bad job dependeing oif airbnb or IBM WebSphere

report to sales (we're too expensive), report to marketing (we send too much
emails)

today job is more focus on evengelism than getting feedback in. That's bad
who do we report to? markeing or product? we do report to marketing, but we
should report to product



should we do online of face2face
online reach more
measurable, we can track everything
o need to ravel
and cheaper

face2face
better engagement. qualified leads
build real relathionships on long term
better feedback

we are bost technical and extravert and don't consider marketing t be
a profanity
hard to find such a profile

ratio online/offline depends on who you have on your time
depends on people and what they like to do
need to diversify the team
what happen if the tech lead evengelist leaves? will he take the brand image
with him? that's why we need several people

measure... no-one know how to do it. but it's asked of everyone in every company
why should we measure it
justify our existence, prove that what we do is useful
improve what we do, need to compare

what do we measure?
one metric: how much acqusition cost
hard metric is to know if the cost of en event matches the
measuring  online  is  easy,  so  much  easier  part,  the  one  where  we  show  results

it's easier to mesure marketing feedback (everything is measureable)
product feedbac (really relative)

measure face2face is almost impossible

how to measure a conf talk
every good speakers say that they have no idea
audience size is a bad metric. easy byut horrible
measure attendance is only the buzzwordiness of the title (that's how people
choose talks)
conference rating is nice, if tweet, if people took pictures. nice but might not
have the results you expect

face2fcae can be measured if people tweet about a specific keyword you used in
your talks
but maybe no internet, or end of day no battery, no tweetable slides (animated
gof), or people forget the @handle. 
not possible to measure this online activity that much

don't measure to prove your existence, but to improve yourself and the team

only way to have great devrel is to have trust and vision. don't watste your
time and money measuring what cannot be measured. CFO/CEO need to share the
vision and trust the peple. "Sylvain is the best metric DocSearch can have"


## Community in a box
Chef

Mandi Walls

## Twitter

8 years of Twitter API, but only when released fabric, a way ti embed twitter in
movile app did they have the official SDK on top of it
API is not enough (REST), need the library on top of it
included also crash reporting, scalin distribution

launched an annula conference about fabric
big conference event will bring press, media, ut hard to get the actual people
that will use it

build new things that were not there before, instead of just providing libs that
do the same things as before
custom website for each product, way to read, try, contribute, ask question

drupal nt good for forum, spamming
category for feedback, ut people where not complaining aout the lib, ut about
the company in general
moved to discourse

filtering out profanity before posting, need to remove ranting, need to have
anice moderated place
code samples of "good code" on how to use the API
after one year, move community members to community moderators. great way to
scale

Created "Twitter Developer Community" all around the world. 17 meetups, lots of
members
need to build tools that allow people to see each ther and find eash tother. the
community will grow from thatorganically.

trust is difficult to earn because it's easily lost. Thats why our job is hard.
We are personally representing the company, putting us on stage, but our message
can be destroyed by other, faceless, people from the company through marketing.
"we win, one developer at a time". Aplogize when screwing up, emptahize, ig
rooms are not a factor of success.

find people that are antagonists, and if manage to move them to allies is a nice
metric

(feedback that our doc is exhaustive, real tone of developer to developer)

be passionate, patient and yourself


developers are not alien specy. not "we cannot market to developers" the goal of
marketing is to explain thing to anyone. might not work with emails or ads, but
there is a way

dev advocate is engineer, who likes to speak on public, write articles, and code
and is atcive online and great SO reputation. not trivial

evangelims (pulic speaking getting the word out), advocacy (listeing, getting
the word in). Need both. Cannot do speaking without listning and giving feedbacl
because e don't believe in the product if e know feedback s ot trajen uto
account. Same, can't only hear from the communiyt if the community does not knw
aout it.

shared metric of NPS with other jobs, same for revene adotpion, etc. work with
outreach, stratey, content, etc
need to work with marketing, not for marketing

ideal world. CMO handle marketing and CTO handle developer relations
marketing only have number of signups, quantity more than quality
goes along the "Sylvain is the best metric", no metric, we need to have trust

our community is actually developers. Thats who we know how to talk to. ask
forgivness not permission

adovcate or evangelims don't matter. it's just different than marketing. one is
inbound, the other is outbound
need a job specificity in the compnay so people know what you do
dev rel done wrong can kill marketing efforts, marketing done wrong can kill dev
rel
build trust bysolving real problem. no big banner of "best solution ever".
collaborate with marketing, different ways, different targets, dfferent metrics,
same goals



## Creating compleling content

Loran Jane Mitchell, IBM

writeing is  agood way to reach people
wriing something down, we solve the problem of gicing something from your brain
to someone else
advocates, we know how to help people
we can help on one an one, can do it for more people in a room or small commity
writing down will reach more and more people
will also allow the writer to "forget" about it and put people to refer to it


always cature ideas about a lot of things. have ideas aout what to write or what
to build

people don't know all I know, I can share things. the world need more advice
from people that are ahead on the path of knowledge. just write down things you
do

ask yoursefl BEFORE. Who is this for? What will the learn?


## DevRel and people that build stuff

devrel either come from marketing or from engineer
ut over time devrel become a new entity. mostly because devrel is travelling
a lot, while engineer are staying in the office. devrel are doing  alot of
context sitch. hard to stay sitting on one project

become a new team with nex ember, own tools, processes, not in the enineering
team anymore (maybe hacing a squad with devrel in each squad, like designer,
etc)

Developer Programs Engineers. Code, but also go a bit on meetups and community
Developer Advocate. 


No need for useless LinkedIn connections or business cards. We need quality of
relationships. We are a human face of the company, we need to provide what human
can provides. And this, by definition, do not scale. And that's ok. Talking to
people and making relationships will scale as people will become our
ambassaodrd. We will also need more Developer Advocates. Official, full time
job, or part-time from our engineers.
Looking for quality, not quantity.

I went the way of moving from Developer Relation to larger Community. Now
backing off, I'm a Developer, I know how to speak to them, and more importantly
speak with them and build things with them. I should focus on Developrs. That's
what I am, what I like. I had this epiphany in New Zealand. I'm passionate about
that, and that's an asset, something Marketing cannot do. I like to speak in
public, speaking face to face with people, something engineers can't do.

CSE, in their documentation/tool side are actually Developer Advocates, but
focus in the shadow of enterprise customers, but still doing partly the same
job.





pec.rb
less -R
less -R
less -R
less -R
1<Plug>unimpairedMoveUpkkkk/
