---
layout: post
title: "MiXiT 2017"
tags: mixit
---

I just spend two days at MiXiT in Lyon, France. The conf is announced as a mix
between tech, hacktivism and overall thinking about our place, as developer in
the work world.

I didn't really know what to expect but had great feedback from friends, and
I now understand why. The very first minutes of the first keynotes set the tone.
They actually really set the tone. We had a live classical orchestra on stage.

Other conferences might have some ambient music to set the mood, Mixit actually
had real people setting the mood, and that is what set this conference apart
from the others.

## Intro

It's the 7th year edition of mixit, and is a huge success. They are sold out and
had to organize a lottery to chose who would be able to buy the last tickets, to
give a fair chance to everyone.

They also heaviliyu invested in accesisbility, by adding some live writing
transcirption on screen of what the speakers are saying, as to help people with
hearing troubles. Other conferences like ParisWeb use velotypie, but mixit used
an app developed by someone in Lyon that does automatice speech-to-text
transcription on the fly, with a crew of 4 people proofreading the initial
output. It was a bit laggy (sentences could happen ~1mn later), but is better
than nothin and will greatly help with adding subtitles later I guess.

They even when way beyond that, by providing a breast-feeding room, yoga
classes, crepes, quiet room, organic food, recyclable cups and plates. I suspect that's
also why they didn't give any swag bag. It's always the same set of tote bag,
flyer, pen and sticker that you end up throwing away.

Talks are 50mn long and workshops 1h50, which I find a bit too long personnally.
I skipped a few conferences during the day, prefering spedning my time talking
with people and enjoying a quiet coffee in the sunny Lyon afternoon.

## Live orchestra

The orchestra on stage was not actually only for playing music, it was actually
the first keynote. A Chef d'orchestre and his crew played various melodies and
let us think about what makes a group.

Each is his own individuality, but when they come together, they create
something bigger, something different, and it's hard to tell who is doing what.
Depending on the play, everyone could play a very similar tune, or a completly
different one.

From the outside, the chef d'orchestre does not seem to be doing much, but he is
actually the binding between all the individuals. He sets the pace, through his
breathing and hand movement at which the others will follow.

If he wasn't there, everyone will still do its best to keep a cohesive ensemble,
and because they are professionnal, it will still work and be a nice melody. But
by also having a great leader, they will follow a smoother curve and the overall
melody will be more harmonious than the sum of individualities.

The important thing is that the leader does not have to always be the chef
d'orchestre. Anyone in the band can take the leadership at any moment, then pass
it to someone else. But haing one helps everyone following the same pace, and
creating an overall result, for the outside world, that seems more cohesive.

The parallel with a dev team was never explicitly explained in the talk, nor
with any kind of group for that matter. But you couldn't not draw some allusion
from one world to another. It all subtle, a "show, don't tell", that let the
audience make up their own conclusion from it and shows great respect for the
audience.

## The Gonette

Second talk was by Nicolas Briet, that presented the Gonette, a local currency
in Lyon. He is a chimist by trade but left his job to sart thinking and wating
to understand why banks are collapsing, what subprimes are, how the fiscal and
economical world is working 

He understood that 98% of all world transaction are purely speculatives, and
only 2% are classical one of you buying something to someone else. 

Money rules the world is a common saying. But it is more than that, money gives
power and power gives money, making rich people richer. It's a vicious circle.

The project of a local currency is to prevent money from getting out of
a specific system. By staying in the same system, it works as a vertuous circle
where what you buy to your neighbor will make him be able to buy to you. By
having a global money system, accross the world, makes your local investment
going far away from you and prevent this vertuous circle.

## Il est temps de repenser notre manière de travailler

First punch talk of the day, that will set the tone for others talks afterwards.
Marie-Cécile Paccard made us think about what working means.

More and more jobs of our world can be automated. We know that. We contribute to
that. Every line of code we write is meant to do a job a human being could do,
but in a much faster way. New tech advancement will put out of business previois
jobs. Think press and internet, taxi drivers and uber, uber drivers and self
driving cars.

Many more jobs will be replaced by "robots", automated. Still, we're still
talking about unemployment rate and considering that employment is the solution
to our issues. Working is not a solution, it is a mean to an end.

"So what? Are we going to pay people to do nothing?" is the basic knee-jerk
reaction. It seems unfair. We worked hard for our money, so others should too.
So we make people do things in companies, so they can get paid. Being paid doing
nothing just does not seem right, so we ask them to do something. Anything. The
video shows people as chairs, traffic light, etc. They are "working", even if
it's useless. Getting money for not doing anything seems so wrong, that we
prefer giving money for doing something useless.

And that's when the "burn out" occurs. When you consider what you're doing is so
meaningless that you just can't do it anymore. You even consider killing
yourself because the thought of wasting your life doing things you hate and that
are useless abhorrs you.

When this occurs you start considering if it's your fault. If you did something
wrong. If you're too weak to handle. Or maybe it's someone's else fault?
Management maybe?

In the end the burnout is just a symptom of a society that is sick, at large.
The way paid work is wokring in our society justdoes not make any sense. You
have bullshit jobs, middle management jobs, popping up everywhere.

But deep inside you you feel that this is not right. And this gut feeling, you
need to listen to it. Human bodies are a very impressive technology. They've
been in production for thousand of years. No-one really understands how it
works. It's full of legacy code that never had any documentation, and we're
trying to reverse-engineering it. But it has survived thousand of years of war,
epidemies and worse things. It contains defense mechanisms against harm. Even if
we don't understand them, they are still here, and we need to listen to this
warnings.

When your gut feeling tells you something is not right, it's not just random. It
has a cause. You can't specifically say why, but your body knows, and you'd
better listen to it.

And the issue might be coming from the Taylorism approach to jobs we have today.
We split jobs in small parts. One person will do step X, the next will do step
Y and so one. Each step is small enough that anyone could learn it quickly. It
does not require much experience. For sure, you can produce things quicker and
cheaper if you build them following a taylored chain.

But you remove goals to people. They don't build a clock anymore. They build
a tiny screw. They have no purpose in what they are building, they have no
expertise, they could build screws for clocks or for anything else and that
would be the same. The end goal is lost.

It reminded me of this story of a man seeing another, at work with a hammer and
"burin" on a stone. When asked "What do you do?", you often have three different
answers:
1. I work
2. I carve a stone
3. I build a cathedral

Person in 1 just have a job, they don't care what it is. They do their part and
get paid for it, that's it. Person in 2 have more expertise in what they are
doing, they want to do a good job of it, and be proud of what they do. People in
3 have a bigger goal in mind, they are not only carving for themselves, but for
the commnity as a whole.

As said, by limiting people to do only one thing in their job, you're losing
valuable experience. You're making every employee interchangeable. They're all
the same. They have to specific expertise.

And on a personal level it means that you're losing your personal interest at
doing your work. 

At Algolia, our main value is ownership. We trust employees to do things in the
best way. Let experts be experts. They have goals, maybe large ones, but they
have the grit and the opportunity to do it. We won't micro manage to ask them to
do one thing only.

And in a world were jobs are getting more and more meaningless, people are
losing their motivation, work day are feeling less and less real. To compensate,
companies are rying to artificially inject "humaness" into the companies. We
over-humanise work. We force team uilding, after work, pinball and socialising
events. We're trying to make the work place into a social place. 

But we still don't define the clean boundaries between the two. We ask employees
to be "involved" in their work, to show "passion". We're assessing the human
aspect of employees, not their expertise. We are assessing the value of an
employee no longer on objective work output, but on subjective personal views.

It can creates huge dissonances that can lead to burnout. When you work, you
sell you professional expertise. You're not hired because you're good looking or
fun, you're hired because you have expertise into a specific field, and you're
selling this expertise.

This dissonance is visible on many layers. We talk about Human Resources. It's
either Human, or a Resource, it cannot be both. We kept the taylorisme, but we
tried to artifically inject humain on top of it. And we're now right in the
uncanny valley, where the human aspect is human enough to feel real, but
deshumanised enough so it feels horribly wrong.

All this forced humanisation of work is often badly done by companies. They try
to infantilise people. Doing costumed parties, trying to attract people at booth
with video games and lollipops. They're basically saying: "We don't care about
you, we care about your skills." When you want people to act as adults, you
treat them as adults. If you give them video games and lollipops as benefits of
their workplace, you're actively treating them as child, telling them they
should not take initiative/ownership. They are just one more developer to add to
your cheptel, they all look the same, you're only interested in their skills so
you can send them on a mission. Who are they? You don't care, they're just one
more developer you'll be able to trick with shiny gadgets and fire later.

Technically, work is not only paid work. Every other activity you do on your
free time, like gardening, repair work, playing an instrument, is still work.
It's just not paid work. Some people are paid to do it. There are gardeners,
repair man, professional musician. They are paid to do it, but not you.

The world of today expect us to be able to handle our financial needs with our
paid work. Paid work has a specific status. We consider that people that don't
have paid work are not working. That's not true. Unpaid work is still work. If
you decide to build a website for free to a friend, it's still work. It will be
the same quality as the one you'll build for a customer. So not being paid for
something does not mean this something is less valuable.

CDI is powerful, you got easier access to loans, better social status. And
companies are actually deciding who gets a CDI or not, having a huge impact on
people lifes. We need to not think less of people that are unemployed, or having
an status different than a CDI. A CDI is seen as a stable position, it will be
harder to fire you, you'll have your job for longer. Actually, as developers we
don't care. It's so easy for us to find jobs, with a CDI or not, we won't have
any issue. Also, it's common to move company every ~4 years so...

We need to set clear limits of what work is and what it isn't. People need to
think about their personal goals, and personal values. It takes some time, but
write it down, and live by them. It makes choices easier, and let you spot when
youre gong on the wrong path sooner.

=> Talk Blend Web Mix

If jobs are so meaningless and that they will be obsolete soon anyway, why don't
we just give money to everyone. Not because they worked, but because they exist
and a robot is doing their job. Robots stealing job should not be a bad thing,
it should be a good one. It means the money that was given to you to do a job
can now be given to you for not doing it. And you can do many other things in
your free time.

## 2thique des développeurs

Directeur 2thique et relations publiques
Guillaume Champeau

à quel point on teste? écraser des piétons?
faire du mal en "attaquant" un systeme ennemi en cyber defense
arreter les mises à jours et fixs
droit d'auteur?
est-ce que OSS est forcément éthique? est-ce que propriétait peut etre éthique
Machine-learning/AI si dataset biaisé, confirme le comportement et le garde
biaisé

Code d'éthique et de déontoloique
1. ingénieur logiciels doivent agir da sl'einterey public en tout temps

medecins, avocats, architectes, compatble, etc. une charte et un serment, on ne
peut pas le faire si on n'a pas preté serment. une obligayion sans conséquences
n'estpas une obligation
donc développeur n'est pas une profession réglementée

serment d'hypocrate n'était pas une oligatoi, juridique au début
mais accidents, donc on l' rendu obligatoire

ne pas attendre les accidents mais réflechr dessus dès maintenant
on devrait déjà etre sur de respecter les droits de l'homme
1946: Déclaratio Universelle des Droits de l'homme
donner de droits universels à tousnles individues pour opposer aux états
protéer les individues contre les états

droit fondamental sur la vie privée

on agit tous en fonction des rgeards portés sur nous
pas de la même manire si seulchez soi, avec conoint, avec amis, au travail, dans
la rue, en public
si on se sait regardé, on agit différement

ONU, 2013: droit offline doivent aussi etre assurés online
plus seulmeent protection contre les états, mais aussi contre les sosictés comme
facebook
révélation Snowden, les gens arretent de s'informer, de peur qu"on les catalogue
FB like automatiquement si on reste ongtemps sur un contenu. donc on arrete de
reste longtemps pour éviter de dire à FB ce qu'on aime ou pas
on arrete de s'informer, de peur de se faire juger et que ça se retourne contre
nous

absence de vie privée => arret de l'information => mort de la démocratie

avant, quelque cose était dans ma tete et personne le savait
mais aujourd'hui ce qu'on regarde est stocké en ligne, ce qu'on écoute, ce qu'on
programme sur son réveil, son historique des appels, des contacts, des mails,
livres lus, surlignement
symptomes maladie, adresse lieu, opinions politiques
tout cela dit es choses sur vous

Google connait tout ça sur vous. Tout ces services, et ils font de la recherche.
On peut recercher. Même si socité est éthique, il y aura des failles, il y aura
des fuites.
Donc on se limite, on n'agit plus de la même manière

Qwant ense que le soucis n'est pas internet mais le manque d'éthique. je suis
pessimiste, mais au niveau global, même si tout le monde est éthique et de bonne
fois et respectent les droits de l'homme, il y aura des failles et des leaks.

Qwant moteur sans tracking
pas de cookie, d'istorique, pas de croisement des IP et des requetes, https,
infra en europe, droit à l'oubli

Juge américain demande les adresses IP des gens qui ont fait une certain
rechercher, pour identifier une fraude à l'identité.

Bubble effect. On nevoit que les résultats qui vont nous plaire, basés sur ce
qu'on sait déjà, reste dans le même microcosme. On reste dans nos propres
convictions, et on ne se rends pas compte que ce que les autres voient.

## Travailler autrement

Random talk, salle assignée aléatoirement, talk surprise
HackYouJob, pour indépendants, regrupement d'indep

theme recurrent d'avoir trop de chose sà faire et la sensation de ne pas les
terminer. réunions, emails, etc
frustration, pas le temps de se repose le week-end

travail peut-etre pas adapté. CDI pas forcément le mieux
plein temps, CDI, semble le graal
mais existe d'autres rythmes
promesses du CDI mensongere: securite de l'emploi non. et comme dev, le risque
de chomage est nul
qu'est-ce que j'ai envie de faire

perso: jeu de role, ecriture, aventures, partage d'experience

travail de trepalium, instrument de torture

travail est un moyen, pas un but
sortie de sa zone de confort
tenter des choses impossibles
sportif quie cout en dessous de 4mn, un premier le fait, d'autres le font

travailler moins pour gagner moins, et passer plus de temps agréable de loisir
travailler moins, on a du temps pour se reposer et faire d'autres activités et
mieux avancer quand on est dispo
travailler moins n'est pas gagner moins

boulot alimentaire pour se vider la tete la journée, se reposer, mais laisser
aller sa créaivité le soir et son énergie

etre devant sa machine ne dit pas qu'on bosse bien. consyamment interrompu par
Slack, mails, twitter, personne en vrai

casser les routines
bosser en bibliothèque, en café, en coworking

limites de l'open-space. need box pour se concenterr

## CSS Is Awesome

Igor Laborie

Rule of least power; USe the language hat is the less powerful for a given task,
that can do that an just that

veut expliquer le CSS aux gens car plein de misconceptions

astuces un peu pour faire des choses interessantes en CSS sans avoir beosoin de
JS
savoir quand utilisr quoi. JS ou CSS?

Preprocesseurs. trop bien, des vars des fonctions
pas besoin de var pour la couleur du text, crrentColor marche artout
en utilisant du rgba directement, on peut faire de
l'assombrissement/eclairissement sans avoir besoin de scss
preprocesseurs one une durée de vie plus courte queles pre-processuers

mieux vayr tabler sur les post-processeurs, drera plus longtemps

utiliser des rem car zoom bcp mieux
vh, vw, pourcentage du viewport

holy grail layout
header, menu gauche, content, pub, footer
calc(100vh - hauteur de header) espaces autour des opérateur, on peut mélanger
les unitées

pseudo element pour ajouter des éléments
UTF8 pour une fourchette, transforme rotate

element sans taille, grosse bordure transparent, et box shadow pour faire une
autre bordure

before et after archent pas sur input, img, iframe (si sur img, si impossible de
loader l'image)
::selection, ::backdrop (?)

loader animation
display: inline-table plutot que de faire un white-space: pre
animation avec steps pour bouger les éléments dans le content, un loader en pur
CSS + UTF8

input invalid, faire un system de slide uniquement avec :target

checkebox "hack", pour donner un état à la page

tabs avec un transform perpective pour lui donner un aspect d'onglet

permet de garder un markup simple, et de modéliser en CSS

html `details`/`summary` pour un collapsible mais styling compliqu" (comme
`fieldset`)
`dialog` pour faire des modals
modal.showModal(), backdrop, peut pas cliquer derriere, bindé sur échap, peu
etre stylé, ainsi que le ::backdrop
peut afficher automatiquemet un dailogue avec un backdrop? pour y mettre de
nouveau éléments comme after/before?

## Majority Judgment

Rida Laraki
4 jours des elections

election: mesure les options de sleecteirs et les agregent pour choisir le
cadidat le plus consensuel
mais le scrutin majoirtaire mesure mal les optnion car il force a ne choisir
qu'un candidat alors qu'il a des opinions sur tous

2002, chirac/le pen et jospin éliminé
paradoe qyu est que si de nouveaux candidats, brouille les votent des autres
présenice ou non d'un candidat qui ne peut gagner, va influer sur le vote final
présence de deux, nuit aux deux. meilleure d'avoir un systeme ou la
présence/l'absence d'un candidat n'influe pas sur les chances des autres

chevalier de borda: choisir chaque candidata un par un comparé aux autres
méthodes différentes change le gagnat des élections

paradowe de Condorcet, ou personne ne gagne. A bat B, B bat C, C bat A. Pierre,
Feuille, Ciseaux.

Ce qu'on veut c'est, theorme de Arrow
- Traitement égal de tous
- Si plus populaire, augmente ses chances
- Toujous un gagnant
- Ajouter un candidat ne change pas le gagnant s'il ne gagne pas

Preuve: Impossible à garantir ça.

a la place on ne demande de comparer
mais on demande de noter, comme à l'école. TB, B, AB, Passable, Insuffisant,
À rejeter
a partir de ça, on peur créer une infinite de modes de scrutins qui satisfont
les regles notées

on cherche donc une méthode qui résiste plus au vote stratégique (où on mets
moins bien que ce qu'on pense en voulant alterer le résultat). On veut que ça
résiste à 30% des votes stratégiques.

tout le monde n'a pas a meme echelle mentale. On donne pas TB, ou pas
insuffisant. Ou des gens qui ont un péréfér, qui ne va donner TB qu'à une
personne
en tie-breaking, facile de savoir qui gagne
mais si égalité "TB, B, B, AB, P" VS "TB, B, B, B, AB"
on peut faire du "trim average", on enleve les extremes du haut et du bas, et
ainsi de suite jusqu'à garder la médiane

on élmine donc jusqu'à ce qu'on puisse appliquée une dominance

X% pensent que le candidat vaut AU MOINS Passable/AB/etc
on regarde la mention majoritaire, et c'est sa note

si on repose la même question au fur et a mesure de l'election, les réponses aux
questions sont les mêmes

donne une grnde liberté à l'electeur pour exprimer ses opinions
comme si un prof sur une classe 20 dit "lui c'est le meilleur", mais dit rien
sur les autres
evite patadoxe condorcet, et arrow
mesure avec precision le merite
resiste au vote stratégique

si tous les candidats sont rejetés par une majorité, on refait l'election avec
d'autres candidats



