---
layout: post
title: "MiXiT 2017: The Human Part"
tags: mixit
---

Last week I spent two days at Lyon, France, for the MiXiT ([mɪks ɪt]) conference.
I was pleasantly surprised by the high quality, both of the event itself
and the talks. But even more by the high level of care of all the staff and
attendees, the wide breadth and activism of topics.

You could feel the conference was for people, for human, for citizens, before
being for developers. The tech skill level was also impressive, but the more
impressive was how both aspects were so intertwined.

This blog post is about all the non-tech talks. For the tech part, check out
this blog post.

## Group dynamics

The first talk set the tone (pun intended) for the day. When I entered the main
auditorium, I discovered a live classical orchestra on stage. The conductor
talked about band dynamics, and his influence on the rhythm.

He never explicitly stated it, but I could not resist drawing parallels with
other kind of groups, like dev teams, or companies.

Your group can be made of people, each playing a slightly different tune when
taken individually, but playing a different tune when put all
together. Every individuals are skilled in what they are doing, and they each
know what is the global melody they want to achieve as a group. They still need
to be aware of the others, to follow the same rhythm. The bigger the band,
the harder it is for individuals to keep in sync with everyone.

That's when the conductor comes into play. Every individuals in the group now
only need to focus on the conductor and follow his rhythm. The conductor keeps
track of what everyone is doing, and helps those in need, adapting the tempo so
the group acts as a whole.

A good leader can let all members of the band focus on what they each do best
—playing their instrument—, while reducing the amount of energy needed to focus
on the tempo. A mediocre leader will not prevent a skilled band to play, it will
only make it harder. Each individual will do his or her best, and the result
will still be enjoyable. A bad leader can stall a group to a halt, where
the amount of energy needed to follow the instructions if such that people don't
have enough energy left to do what they are skilled at.

An inspiring talk, all in the nuances of "show, don' tell". It got my brain
started immediately, which is always a good way to start a day of conferences!

## Keynotes

Other talks, especially keynotes, were centered around issues we face, as
citizens, not as developers. We had talks about local currency, universal
income, ethics or alternative voting systems.

Lyon has its own local currency, the Gonette (as did more than 40 other cities
in France). Local currency help the flow of money to stay in a local system, not
leaking to more global speculative markets.

Universal income is a concept to give all citizens of a specific country a fixed
income, with no requirement. Speakers debunked the classical "so even rich
people will have it?", "but people will stop working!", "it's too expensive,
states don't have enough money for that" questions.

The debunking I liked the most are the polls that shows that when asked about
Universal Income, most of the people think that the others will stop working.
But when asked if they will stop working, they say no. Everyone thinks the
others are lazier than they see themselves.

## Ethics

Then Guillaume Champeau made me think again with questions about ethics, as
a developer.

We all know that bugs are bad and we should avoid creating them. How far one
should go in making sure its code is bug free will greatly vary from one
individual to another. I might do TDD from day one while others might push to
prod without even testing manually. When you're developing your personal website
it might be ok, but what happens when you're developing embeded code for
self-driving cars or planes? A bug might kill people there. How far should you
go in your testing? When can you say you've done enough?

What do you do when your company asks you to [develop something illegal][1]? Or
if you're sent on a mission for a company you find [unethical][2]? Coding
something you know will be used to create weapons that will kill people? What
about stopping bug fixes and releases on a product you know have security holes
that will leak personal data? What about feeding data you know is incomplete
and/or biased to a machine-learning algorithm?

What we, as developers, might be lacking is an ethical code, some kind of oath
[like in other professions][3]. Doctors, lawyers, architects or comptable have
to swear an oath. They are personally responsible if they fail to follow the
ethical rules of their orders. We don't have those limits. We can do whatever we
want and hide behind the "[it wasn't me][4], it's the algorithm" (thanks to the
complete misunderstanding of this word by media and most judges).

Trying to do our best is not enough. Even swearing an oath is not enough.
Mistakes will be made, shit will happen, data will leak. Still, thinking about
what we don't want to happen is the first step in finding ways to prevent it.
Technology is shaping the world of tomorrow, and we are the makers of that.
We have an incredible power into our hands, and not thinking about the damage we
could do is irresponsible.

I don't know which rules we should abide to, collectively, and I'm not even sure
rules are the solution. But we can start, individually, to think about the
limits we should never cross. Let's not wait until it's too late. Better safe
than sorry.

Once again, interesting questions, and my brain racing. I've asked myself those
questions in the past, and came up with my own ethical lines for most of them.
But I was happy discussing with more junior developers afterwards that told me
that they never thought about that before and now have to find where they stand.

After the atrocities of WW2, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights was
signed. It gave every individual a set of rights that they could use to oppose
states, a way to protect the individuals against the states. It's 2017 today,
and tech companies have more power than states. Think about Facebook
and Google, that have more registered users than any state, and much more
information about you than any of them.

I don't act the same when I'm alone at home or with my girlfriend. I don't talk
about the same subjects in the intimacy of my home, or in the subway. I don't
speak and act the same way when I'm casually discussing with a coworker around
the coffee machine, or on stage in front of 250 people. I might sing under the
shower in the morning, when I'm alone, but would never dare do it in the street.
There are things I could talk with my friends that I would not dare say if my
parents could hear it, things that are private and that I can discuss with my
family but would not want to share at work, or vice-versa.

We act differently based on who is watching us, who can hear what we're saying.

Now, think about everything you told Google, and if you would have ever told the
same thing to your loved one, your boss, your parents, your friends or a random
person in the street?

Did you search for some illness symptoms you had? Did you search for an address
for a place you wanted to go to? Did you search for a political party
program? Did you ever search for a childhood crush?

After Snowden announced that the NSA had access to this data and used it to
track terrorists, people started to change their behavior. They stopped
searching for some content, afraid that they would trigger something on the NSA
side and be flaged as a terrorist. When Facebook announced that it could
automatically detect if you were interested in some content based on the time
you spend on it, people started to consciously limit the time they spent on each
article, once again, fearing to trigger anything.

Knowing who is watching you changes your behavior. People act differently now
that they know that what they do online is not private, and can be accessed.
People are afraid they will be judged by the content they read, and that it
will backfire against them.

Let that sink for a minute. People stop searching some topics, stop reading some
content, because they know they are watched. Because they know they have no
privacy, they're afraid of being judged of what they do, so they stop doing
anything that is not "the norm". They stop doing in private what they would not
do in public. They stopped looking for information. Without access to
information, you can only make poor choices. Choice is the cornerstone of
democracy; if you have no choice, you have no democracy. Removing privacy is
dangerous as it removes the ability to be informed, hence to take sensible
choice. Removing privacy destroys democracy.

That's exactly why, in a democracy, everyone votes are in an anonymous, sealed,
envelope. If voting was public, people would vote differently.

Fighting for privacy is not because people have some dark secret they want to
keep in the shadows, it's actually a fight to keep democracy alive. Privacy is
a mark of trust. No society can work without trust.

## Majority Judgment

The keynote about the election system was perfectly timed, a few days before the
french presidential election.

It started by explaining the limitation of the current voting system where you
do not vote based on who you want elected, but based on how you vote will
influence the result. The goal of an election is to aggregate what voters chose,
in order to pick the more consensual candidate. The "scrutin majoritaire" used
in France does not correctly measing opinions as it forces voters to pick only
one candidate. And we don't have opinions on only, we have opinions on everyone
of them, but those opinions are not registered.

When it comes to something as important as picking the person that will run the
state for 5 years, being asked to summarize all our views in only one name does
not seem appropriate.

What is even worse is that results can be completly different if we had or
remove candidates. Of course if you add a candidate that everyone loves, he will
be elected, and the result will be different. I'm talking about adding
a candidate that will not win. Just adding one into the mix will change the
outcome. Why should adding someone that won't win change the final winner?

A better system would let any number of candidate take part in the election, and
the exact number should not change who is winning. A way to do that,
instead of asking "who do you think is the best of the 10 candidates", would be
to ask "Between A and B, who do you think is best? And between A and C?", and
ask the question for each couple of candidates. Based on that we could find the
candidate that is the most preferred against the others.

This system is interesing but still has one paradox. It is possible to have
results in such a way that no-one is winning. Just like the Rock-Paper-Scissor
game, you can find a configuration where no clear winner exists. This is called
the Condorcet Paradox.

A better system would be to ask each voter to evaluate each candidate on
a specific question. Something like "For each of the following candidate, how do
you think they will best represent the French interests?" followed by a double
entry table with the candidates and columns for "Very good, good, average, bad,
very bad". That is of course an example. The question is very important, as is
the wording of the choices. It is important to note that we're not asking to
give a note (like a star rating), we're asking to answer a question.

It is important because it will have an impact in the way we then calculate who
is the winner. Maybe we want the one that has the most of "Very good", or the
one that has the least "very bad", or something different. The suggested way,
called the "majority vote", is to pick the median value for each candidate
(where 50% of the votes are above, and 50% are below). The candidate with the
highest median will be elected. In case of ties, we keep only the contenders and
do a "trim average": we remove the best and worst results of each and
recalculate the median until we have a clear winner.

I really like that the way we express our choice is not boolean and have many
more nuances. Finding the right way to extract one leader from all this data is
tricky. If everyone plays fair, it will pick a candidate no-one really has
a strong opinion about. No-one really wanted him or her, but no-ones really
rejected him or her either. If that's what democracy is about or not is another
question.

But the best part of this voting system for me is that we can easily see if
candidates are massively rejected. The vote can show that the people does not
want *any* of them, and a new election with new candidates can be started again.

## Green villages

Keynote about green village, monotonous TEDTalk rhythm. Lots of text on slides
that you cannot read. Seems like a brochure to sell to a bank. Her name was
never written, always the name of her boss. Seems like they had everything
planned, with "smart" detectors everywhere, but no tech involved. They had their
plan on several years ready.

Was followed around with her filming crew. Seemed more done for a promotional
video than for the audience.

Subject seems interesting, but ended up being boring.

## Revenu universel

sans conditions
individuel


la société fait qu'on a de la chanc eou non
richissime a aux USA? n'autai pas éé richissime au bangladesh
la société enrichi, donc nécessaire de redonner au reste

idée de plsieurs siecles
Thomas Payne, 19e sicel
yete our tous, mais certains se le sont accaoérés
dpnc certains ont plis de choses
dpnc il faut donner aux autres pour qu'ils puissent subvenir à leurs besoin

30 glorieuse, on reste au boulot lontmps
protection sociale sur ce prncipe de plein empli

aujourd'hui on coloc, on covoiture, on fait plsieurs jobs dans sa vie ou même en
même dans la meme journée
coworking

plus de chommae, plus irregulier
p-e on aura plus d'emplois, mais ils seront forcement moins stables, on enc
hagrea lus souvent

combien?
argent, quelle somme?
premier kilo d'eau delectivité, de transposrts en commun gratuits
ou indexer sur le seuil de pauvreté, pour éviter que ca change

"impossible à financer!"
si revenu universel, supprime RSA, potentiellement supprime d'autre aides, donc
auto-fnancement
plus siple administartivement, tout le monde a la même, plutot que prouver que
assez pauvre pour y avoir droit
doit remplacer avantaeuemsent. pour ou contre a pas d'interet si le montant est
pas fixé. revenu universel qui annule autres protectios mais trop faible pas
interessant

seucirté cociale remplace pas le reenu universel,

"meme les riches y ont droit?"

oui, universel. Tout le monde le recoit, et tout le monde donne. Tout le monde
a la meee base, mais les plus riches cotisent plus

finacement sur les taxes
patrimoine, revenus, consommation, valeur ajoutée
patrimoine taxe est differet selont la zone géographique, pas légitime
taxe fonciere était pour proprios. plus logique aujourd'hui où on s'endette pour
avoir un bien. taxe sur 'actif net' est difference entre prix et emprunt

flat tax: 30% des rveenus quelque soit le revenu pour tous

inflation nécessaire car si le prix baisse demain, apres-demain, on attendra et
on achetera as
donc etat créé de la monnaie pour rembourser les dettes des banques, pour que
les banques puissent faire des prets aux gens pour qu'ils puissent acheter
plutot redonner aux citoyens directement

canada, ville de Dauphin
revenu universel: 800€
baisse du emps de travail 2%
hausse scolarité
gens e étude continuent de se former plutot que de bosser vite
baisse d efréquentation aux hopitaux, car gens moins malades

namibie, village, 2 ans
micro-credit. credit pour quelque chose, remplit le crédit
stimule l'offre et la demande, créé des entrepreneurs énormes, on peut acheter
sans s'endetter et on peut consommer plus
pays pauvres, lance assez pour lancer la consommation

finlande, depuis 2017
2000 chomeurs random. 560€, remplace indemnité chaomage
mais le gardent s'ils ont un boulot
permet d'avoir plus de gens sur du temps partiel que personne ne veut faire
test, on voit sur deux ans pour voir comment évolue sur l'emploi
reflecion pour le faire en Gironde

revenu universel c'est un concept, plein de concretisations

REVE
Revenu Emancipateur pour Vivre Epanoui
Fraternité: 9 Millions sous le seuil de pauvreté => revenu universel au seuil de
pauvreté
Egalité: Richesse non partagées, redistribuons
Liberté: Chomage et peu de croissance, pas de choix. Revenu universel, on choisi
ses activités, pas juste un
ex abeille: but est pas de faire du miel qu'on vends, elle font de la
pollenisation, mais pas "rémunéré".

peur: parce qu'on réflchi pour les atres, comme quoi les gens vont en abuser,
mais on doit se les poser à soi. "Et vous que feriez vous avec un revenu garanti
a vie?"


##

Kiné, Astrophysicien, Java, React Native, Mixité, Design, Ecologie, remote
working, user testing sans budget, security,

Many talks made me think, made me ask questions about me, about work, about our
world, our society. I have many more questions after the event than I had
before, and it's a very great feeling. I hadn't felt than way since the very
first editions of ParisWeb. Congrats to all the team, and I'll see you next
year.


[1]: https://www.nytimes.com/2017/03/03/technology/uber-greyball-program-evade-authorities.html
[2]: https://www.palantir.com/
[3]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hippocratic_Oath
[4]: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Qv5fqunQ_4I
