## SNCF Connect & Tech

First time hosting the meetup. They do the app used by people and also their
"difital factory" for internal tools. 300 devs

## Sfeir

Pure bad slides.

## Typescript all the things

Benjamin Legrand, Tech Lead at OnePoint. @benjilegnard

How do we share an API between client and server in Typescrpt. We'll see
prisma.io and trpc.io

He wants to be "full-stack" to be able to develop all features from start to
finish. Most of the time it needs using different languages, so different
conetxtes, so context siwtching. Advantage of oing Typescript is that we switch
less.

How to share code client/server. Different servers, and need to serialize the
data t share it between contextes, but also needs a lot of documentatio to know
how it sorks. here is a lot to do to be able to not lose the types.

One coule use swagger/openapi. Allows to start either with the scsgema and
generate teh code, or start with the code an dgenerate the documentation.

Another solution is to have a shared module between the two parts. But only orks
if you have the same language. Raises questions of versioning between the
digerent repo where the are located. You can't ave a diferent ersionin the
server and client, one miht need a monorepo for that.

Third solutio is to use graphql, protobuff, etc. It uses one schema API to
define everything, and thena  step to auto-generate the code frm it

One could just simply write the code twice, on client and server. Same typing on
both side. Doesn't work well when both languages have different naming
convention between camelCase and lower_case. I've seen that with Rails on the
backend and React in the front.

All of those solution are heavy handed, there is a better way, mostly on the DX
side.

So, let's start with a full JS stack with TS and node both on the server and
browser. Code can be shared by default. You only need to recruit a developer to
work on btoh sides, and they will most prooably be full stajc.

But, ou need a monorepo ebtween the front and back, so the versions are
synchrnized and features are relased at the same time. The advantage is the code
is at the same place, but it doesn't mean you have to ship everything in one go.
You can ship pieces individually, but the source code lives at the same
location.

There is good tooling on that, `nx` being better than `turborepo` or `lerna`
according to him.

Now, aabout TS. TS is not a language, it's ontop of JS, it documents JS. Don't
forget hat types are rmeoved at runtime, t only checks at compile time. This
doesn't replace a validation system.

What is great is type inference. Necause TS an detect a tpe, we do,'t need to
declare everything. It is can guess on several layer what a type is.

What is bad is that wheever we change language or machine, on the wre, we lose
the typing at the edges. Any `queryString` will lose the info because everything
is going to be a string. Any JSON serialisation will remove it. Any local or db
storage.

Prisma is an ORM, can gives an API to interact with a DB in an abstracted way.
In nodejs there is Sequelize, Knex or TypeORM also. Those suggest to add
annotattion to the code to define the typeof the DB. It fores to be use din
classes, and causes all potential issues with POO.

In prisma, you define your schema in prisma, and prisma can do the databse
migration, and also creates the types.

`prisma db pull` can be used on an existing DB, to generate the types. Can be
used either on a new project, or on top of an existing one.

TRPC. Typsecript Remote Procedure Call
Import the server api on the client. Only imprt the types. Now we can get data
from one side to anuther.
Any query will be a GET, any update will be a POST, and subscriptions with
websockets.

Drawbacks are still that we don't ahe types at truntime, so not possible de
validationinput, no way to correctly check that data is corectly passed. Still
issues with JSON.parse()/JSON.stringify() (like, lose the dates, Set/Map, etc)

He suggests some companion aps like `zod`, `yup` and  `superstruct`.
- zod can define types based on validation rules
- `superjson` will correclt serialize issues with JSON parse/serialize
- `trp-openapi` to document trpc APIs

Now we have typing all the way. Could also work with Blazer in C#, or Rust/WASM,
or Kotlin


## I don't have passion for my job. So what?

Let's imagine a viking village with Flameguard and Icegard. One is for the
passion, the other is for the work. War of Clans between the two. How can we
make them work together.

What is passion? Affectif state, intensive, dominate. Not like obsession.
Obsession is a prison, Passion is liberty.

Took 200 millions job offer. 2001 and 2017, 10x more "passion" word. So maybe
Passion and Work is the same?
Can we gauge the passion of someone based on how engaged they are in their
actvities, how it gives them happiness, and how they link it to their sense of
self.

Passin can be obsessive or harmony.
Obsessive is keep working on something, and don't do other thing in their life.
Harmony, allows people to keep if they do the activity or not

Being passionate makes you work more, more hours, more productive, keep growing.

Malcolm Gladwell said that 10k hours is what makes you an expert, and
potentially become passionate about it. So it would mean we just have to code
10k hours to beacome passionate

Counter analysis, 10k hours makes you 25% better at most.

There are links between passion and exploitation
Interesting that we consider that passion can be an outcome in itself, and
people should be paid less if they are passionate because they are already lucky
to do what they like. Even if passionate people tend to work more because of
that.


? What about having more passions, make them less obsessive and mre harmonious?
Solution to be less obsessive is to have more passions?



