# We Love Speed 2023

Center of Paris. Two tracks in parallel, most in french, a few english talks. In
Paris, which is more expensive than other cities, so might be somewhere else in
the future. They don't want to be only in Paris, to open it to many people.

About WebPerf, to teach people that don't know about, and also to go into deep
details.

## Let's talk about values

Boris Schapira

Use to work at Darboost, that did lab testing (synthtic tesing). Tool i englisg,
but had a great impact on french ecosystem.

Devs loves Dareboost, but people in the org weren't sure it had an mpact. How do
I know if this has an impact? How do I prooriiez it based against security or
product feature. How can I know how much it will make me earn? What is the ROI?

To be sure that a webperf project works, it needs to have a visible friction. So
someone important complains. We can then evaluate how much it would give us
back, thne we can evaluate how much to invest. We then look at the ROI, and see
if we keep going.

But most of the time, we fallback on authority argument, from other people
because it's hard to quantify.

RUM is Real Time MOnitoring. What does it brings? Dareboost gives a lot of data
for devs. When brought by Contentsquare, saw that theyu had the right arguments
to talk to product and analyst people to show them the value of the data.

Mesure some Core Web vitels. Stable visual feedback, something that doesn't
move. Then Trust Markers, show stuff that poeple are interested in. And great
interaction. This is CLS, LCP, FID.

Thos are imperfect indicators, but potentilaly the closest thing. Tey are not
really explaining how people feel, but they are useful indocators, to be merged
with other indicators from other parts.

This can be done with CS, but can also be done ith other tools.

For example, what happens to people with a bad webperf? Allows to create cohort
listing, of specific users, and see if there is a correlation betwen bad webperf
and conversion.

Interesting to see impact of Lazy Loading, to show in an A/B test if images are
more interacted with that others. Example of line 1 not changing, line 2 less
attractive, but line 3 better.

How many product on a specific product listing. Is 70 too much? 12 not enough?
How to put data. This allows getting real data information, and not authority
argument.

We need to really get data on more than 2 weeks, because there are too many
factors happening in one week to wrong the data. Also need to have specific
goals to quantify per page (browsing product on aproduct page conversion ona
cart page)

We should also split the analysis based on people navigation pattern. people
going dorectly to one page, or browsing a lot, etc. Their browsing pattern shows
a bit more what they want to do, and eahc pattern must be looked individually.
